>>REGINA MEREDITH:
Throughout recorded history,
texts of all faiths have told
of a time of great floods.
One of the most
well-known stories
comes from the Old Testament,
of Noah and his great ark.
Stories passed down
through the ages
in the vicinity of
and on Mount Ararat
have told of the
location of Noah's ark.
Now technology is
assisting in the validation
of these stories.
Maverick archaeologist
Aaron Judkins
went on an intrepid
expedition up Mount Ararat
with a crew of
scientists and filmmakers
in search for the ark.
The film is titled
"Finding Noah."
He's here with us today to
talk about the experience,
the methods, and what
they believe they found.
Before we meet Aaron,
however, let's take a look
at the film trailer to set
the stage for our interview.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-There's been 32
different reports
that I've got of a structure
being seen on that mountain,
no place else.
-If it's there, then
people in the world
ought to know about it.
-Do I believe there's
something there?
Yes.
What it is, don't know.
If you do see this boat
sticking out of the ancient ice,
it could change everything.
-We saw some
interesting anomalies.
An anomaly is
something that's not
normal to the ice formation.
-There has to be a
cause bigger and greater
than yourself to
motivate you to do that.
-We're gonna climb
that mountain.
-This would be the
biggest discovery
in the history of the world.
-That mountain is
a lurking beast
that will just consume you if
you make one small mistake.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>REGINA: Well done.
This was a good film crew.
They did a great job
on this, it looks like,
from what I've seen so far.
>>AARON JUDKINS: Yeah.
They really did.
We had some great
people on the team.
And the film crew, this was a
crew hired for their expertise
in climbing to a
height of 17,000 feet.
>>REGINA: It's crazy.
>>JUDKINS: So these guys
knew what they were doing.
Of course, it's
directed by Brent Baum
and produced as well.
And then our producer,
Matthew Marsden,
who you might know from "Black
Hawk Down" and "Transformers."
>>REGINA: Yeah.
No, this is very
compelling, very well done,
beautiful cinematography.
But before we go into
any of that, let's
set the stage for
the actual location,
the geopolitical environment,
the environment itself
of Mount Ararat so people can
have an understanding of what
you were up against.
It wasn't just a little trek
up a little mountain here.
>>JUDKINS: No.
No.
I get asked that
quite often, actually.
Why can't you just go
up there and find it?
And of course, over
the years, and I'm
talking hundreds of years,
we have credible reports
of people seeing something
on that mountain, Mount
Ararat in eastern Turkey.
But it's not as simple as going
up and climbing up to the top
and just looking.
There's a lot more
involved with it.
It's quite an adventure to
try to get up there and get
everything that you
need to do the job.
Just to get yourself
up there it's quite--
>>REGINA: 17,000 feet.
>>JUDKINS: It's hard.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
People get sick at that.
But let's talk about what you
stumble across along the way,
and just even getting up there,
getting passage up there.
>>JUDKINS: Yeah.
Well, you know, just getting
on that mountain requires
a lot of red tape with
the government of Turkey.
And we've had tremendous
success in them allowing us
permission to go
up on the mountain.
With that, it takes
a lot of paperwork,
a lot of time to get
those permissions.
As a matter of fact, we
have had the permission
for the last three to four
years and the only permissions
to excavate and search for
Noah's ark on that mountain.
>>REGINA: That's pretty amazing.
>>JUDKINS: It's pretty amazing.
>>REGINA: That's why we're not
hearing about it elsewhere is
because no one else has been
granted permission except
this--
>>JUDKINS: Not officially.
Not officially.
We've been granted that
official, exclusive access
on the mountain to search.
Now having said that, just
getting access is a real issue.
But even if you get access,
there are so many factors
around that area geopolitically,
weather-wise, crevasses,
boulders, falling rocks,
the PKK, which is the--
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Let's talk about the
politics for a little bit.
>>JUDKINS: The politics.
Historically the politics
has been very, very difficult
around that area.
The PKK, which is the
Kurdish workers freedom
fighters for Kurdistan,
they've been at odds
with the Turkish military.
And they've controlled that
mountain, and they still do.
And so they know who's on
that mountain at all times.
And it's been very
difficult in the years past
to get on that mountain.
As a matter of fact, other teams
have been captured by the PKK
at gunpoint.
They've been held hostage.
And about three to four
years ago, back in 2010,
one of the local guides
who was with our team--
our team was captured, removed
off the mountain at gunpoint.
And they let every
one of our team
go except for one
of the local guys.
And they executed
him as a statement.
And they burned the
trucks and the tractors
that they were making for
a road up through there
at one of the-- down towards
the lower part of the mountain.
So it's a very serious matter
when you go on that mountain.
You put your life at
risk-- a calculated risk,
but it is a risk.
And because of
that, you're always
aware of your surroundings.
You have to be.
When you go on
that mountain, you
go into automatic
survival mode, you know.
But you have to be aware of
who's around you at all times.
Now having said that, the
year that we were there,
2013, just about
a year ago, there
was a truce between the PKK
and the Turkish military.
>>REGINA: Oh, so you really
slotted in at a unique time.
>>JUDKINS: And it held.
That truce held.
There was no active
fighting on the mountain.
We had the necessary permission.
We went up and we were
granted full access.
And we, I guess, were able
to do our work unimpeded.
Now, it's--
>>REGINA: Well, it borders
Syria, Iran, Russia.
Yeah.
>>JUDKINS: It does.
And geopolitically, it has been
really a hard area to search.
People say, well, why
can't you just take
an airplane or a helicopter?
There have been searchers
in the past that
utilizes those aircraft.
But historically, if you
don't have the permission
and they don't
know you're there,
they shoot first and
ask questions later.
So it's very difficult if
you have the permission.
The winds are so very high
that it's very difficult
to really search by aircraft.
>>REGINA: Crazy weather.
>>JUDKINS: And crazy weather.
>>REGINA: Did you
guys know-- did you
decide to go because a truce had
been called or were you just--
did the timing just
work out that way?
>>JUDKINS: The timing
worked out that way.
The leader of the expedition
is Richard Bright.
Now, Richard has been
searching on that mountain
a good part of 30 years.
And he's climbed that
mountain an average of once
a year, so about 30 times.
And he's spent a majority of
his life building relationships
with the--
>>REGINA: With the Kurds.
>>JUDKINS: --local people
around that mountain.
And because of those
established relationships,
we've had quite a few
doors open up for us
and those permissions
obtained where
we can go and do these things.
They just happened to fall
during the truce, which
worked out well,
because this was
the last major scientific
search for the ark.
>>REGINA: It was.
And you just slotted
in at the perfect hour.
>>JUDKINS: We did.
>>REGINA: Wonderful.
Well it's not just
the freedom fighters
and the political tensions.
There are other challenges
about the mountain
itself, some of the wild
dogs that are there.
Tell us a little bit about that
and also what kind of weather
we're looking at.
>>JUDKINS: Well, you know,
environmentally, the weather,
it's clear most mornings.
Now, I didn't see the summit
for the first three or four
days I arrived in eastern Turkey
because it was clouded in.
And when I saw the
summit, the sun came out,
it was clear, beautiful
day, and I saw the summit
for the first time, my heart
sank because I realized,
I'm fixing to have
to climb that thing.
>>REGINA: You didn't
know what was ahead.
>>JUDKINS: I saw
how high it was.
>>REGINA: Yeah, right.
>>JUDKINS: I had trained.
Thankfully I had some wisdom
three months before to train.
And I don't like to train.
But I hired a
personal trainer just
to kick me along and
say, OK, 7 o'clock,
we've got to meet at the gym.
Let's go.
And I was so thankful that I
had done that, a lot of cardio,
a lot of leg strength, and a lot
of breathing so when you get up
to those altitudes you don't
get high altitude sickness.
And so it took a lot of
perseverance for me to do that.
But I was very thankful,
because when I saw that summit,
I realized this is it.
I'm really here.
It's like seeing the
pyramids for the first time.
You see it in the
pictures and TV.
But when I stood next
to the pyramid at Giza
and looked at it and looked up
at it for the very first time,
it's a different story.
You realize how small you are.
And that's the same feeling I
got when I saw Mount Ararat.
>>REGINA: Well now,
the crew is what,
23, 4, 5, something
like 25 people?
>>JUDKINS: Well,
altogether we had,
you know, a lot of the
film crew was there.
We had people coming in
and out of the dig crew.
And so we had a lot of
people at any given time
coming in and out.
>>REGINA: But had
they taken the time
to go through training
beforehand, most of them?
>>JUDKINS: A lot of
them had climbed before.
The film crew had climbed
on other expeditions,
filming other things.
And so they were
hired because we
knew they could get
up the mountain.
And a lot of them have
had experience doing that.
The dig crew had climbed
Mount Ararat, most of them,
in the seasons past.
So they were able to
go up the mountain.
They knew what they were doing.
And it's that first
time, that unknown, you
know, what am I getting into?
And after you do it the first
time, they asked me how I did.
And I have to tell
you the truth.
It was the hardest
thing I've ever done.
>>REGINA: Well, it's
hard to think straight
under those conditions, too.
>>JUDKINS: It can be.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>JUDKINS: I have to
tell you a funny story.
I almost-- before I tell you
that, let me tell you this.
I almost gave up.
And you get to a point where
it ceases to become physical
and it becomes mental.
And I reached that
point-- we got up
about 1:00 AM, started for
the summit about 3:00 AM.
And you're packed with gear.
And you're climbing in the dark.
And from 14,000 feet, which is
the high camp to the summit,
it's steep.
And it's a hard climb.
You're going through
the boulder field.
And so we're talking about
environmental factors.
>>REGINA: It's dangerous, too.
>>JUDKINS: It's dangerous.
You get socked in
by the weather.
And the weather can
change on a dime.
But the big boulders, you've
got to go through that boulder
field.
And it just feels
like it's endless.
So at about somewhere between
15,000 and 16,000 feet,
I stopped.
I was-- Everything in my body
was screaming to give up.
Aaron, turn around,
go back down,
it's easier-- because I
was really feeling it.
And I had stopped to rest.
You don't stop to
rest very long.
You do just to get a little
water and then to go on.
You don't want your
legs to get cold.
You've got to stay going.
And you don't climb
that mountain,
you do it in baby steps.
But having said that, I
stopped because I considered,
I just don't think
I'm going to make it.
I don't know that I'm going
to get myself up there.
It was so difficult.
And about 6:00 in
the morning, the sun
came up over Greater Ararat,
and it casted a shadow
on the valley floor.
And I saw that shadow of the
mountain on that valley floor--
it's probably five
miles on that valley.
And I looked at that
and I thought, wow,
how beautiful is that?
I'm on Mount Ararat
in eastern Turkey
looking at the shadow of--
and I'm on this mountain,
and I've just got a
little ways to go.
And you come to a point where
you have to dig down deep.
It's like Bear Grylls.
He says people are
made of grapes.
You really don't know what
you're made out of, though,
until you're squeezed.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>JUDKINS: Some people
are sour grapes.
Some people are fine wine.
But you really don't
know what you're
made out of until
you're squeezed.
>>REGINA: And theoretically,
each one of you
had to go through this process.
>>JUDKINS: Everyone.
And every time you go
back on that mountain,
I'm sure those guys
who'd climbed before
had to go through it again.
But that's the point
that I reached.
Am I going to give up or
am I going to keep going?
And for that period of time,
even though it was brief,
I had thought about giving up.
And I thought,
Aaron, if I give up,
I'll regret it for
the rest of my life.
How can I go back home and
tell my 11-year-old son
Tannon-- how can I
tell him Daddy gave up,
I couldn't make it?
And I thought, I'm going to do
this no matter what it takes.
I'm going to have to dig down
deep and really reach down deep
and go.
And that's what I did, just
one step in front of the other.
Now, when you get on top,
you're almost at 17,000 feet.
The weather was bad.
When you get on the ice,
you put on your ice gear,
and you go for the summit,
the weather was terrible.
It was terrible.
I thought, oh my
gosh, this is so bad.
The visibility was low.
The wind was blowing sideways.
And it is miserable.
I get up to the summit.
And of course, what
do you want to do?
You want to take a picture.
>>REGINA: Of course.
>>JUDKINS: So I'm from Texas.
I take out my Texas flag I
had packed in my backpack.
I thought, man, this is great.
The weather's bad, but I'm
going to get a picture.
So I proudly fly the flag, the
Texas flag, get my picture.
And of course, you're
not posing very long.
It's so cold up there,
you're getting your picture
and we're moving
on to the campsite.
On the way back, the
weather was great.
And it was beautiful.
The sun was out.
It was clear.
And I thought, what another
opportunity to get a picture
at the summit, because the
first one I'm sure was bad.
I didn't have time to
look at my pictures.
So again I take
the Texas flag out.
I fly it proudly.
And we get a few pictures.
I go back down.
And about a week later,
I'm going through my photos
and I realize something's not
right with this photo of me
on the summit.
And I'm thinking, Aaron,
something is not right.
And I realized that the
Texas flag is upside down.
Not only once.
>>REGINA: You probably
couldn't even see the flag.
>>JUDKINS: Not only
once, but twice.
I did it twice.
And I'm thinking
how can I do this?
I'm representing my state and
I get the flag upside down.
>>REGINA: I'm sure they're
still proud of you.
>>JUDKINS: So anyway, but
that's part of the hypoxia.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>JUDKINS: And of course,
I blame it on hypoxia.
I just didn't look at the flag.
But you do get in those spots
where you do have hypoxia.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Hard to focus.
>>JUDKINS: And it's
hard to breathe.
It's hard to walk.
And it does affect
your thinking at times.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Your mental acuity.
Absolutely.
>>JUDKINS: So until you
acclimate to that environment--
>>REGINA: OK.
Now what about these wild dogs?
What's up with wild dogs?
>>JUDKINS: Well, there are
some wild dogs on the mountain.
We didn't run into
really any wild dogs.
There are those dangers
there where those dogs,
they roam in packs.
And we didn't really
run into any of that.
>>REGINA: Well, that's good.
I just read about them and I
thought, what's up with them?
>>JUDKINS: Well,
but they're there.
And the main thing
that really affect you
is those big boulders, because
when you're at the 14,000 feet
camp, you just pick the softest
rock to pitch your tent,
because it's all rock.
And they're huge boulders.
And during the night, you can
hear the boulders falling--
>>REGINA: Oh, god.
How could you sleep?
>>JUDKINS: --and
whizzing past your tent.
And off in the distance, you can
hear the boulders falling down
the gorge.
And it's a little
unnerving at times.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
A little, you think?
>>JUDKINS: And you're
camped on a slope like this,
so it's not very comfortable
when you get up that high.
>>REGINA: Well, that's why we
called you intrepid explorers.
This is not for
the faint-hearted.
>>JUDKINS: It's really not.
It's really not.
>>REGINA: Wow.
Amazing that you followed
through, that any of you
followed through on it.
Now let's get to some
of the local lore,
because this is in support
of what you were doing.
The local lore among
the native people
there about an ark, a
flood, Ararat in general.
What is some of the native lore?
>>JUDKINS: Well,
it's interesting.
Around that area
of eastern Turkey,
there's a lot of towns named
after the Biblical names
of the Genesis account.
So you have the names
of Noah and his sons.
And even Ararat means
the region of eight.
And we know eight
people were on the ark.
So it's interesting that it's
really embedded in the culture.
Now, the Turkish
government really
doesn't care either way
about finding the ark.
I find it a little odd.
The Kurdish people,
however, that
live around the mountain
have grown up fully embedded
in that story and
in their culture.
And so they're very accustomed
to hearing about the ark
because they live it.
They live there.
And so for them, it's
just second nature.
Toward the north is Armenia.
Now, we actually
went into Armenia
to do some research
with the film.
And the Armenian people really
embrace the story of the ark.
>>REGINA: Isn't there a higher
percentage of Christians
in Armenia versus--
>>JUDKINS: There is.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK.
The bulk of the region.
>>JUDKINS: Armenia
has been traditionally
a Christian nation.
And they really embrace
that story of Noahs' ark.
So there's a really-- there's
a contrast between the two.
>>REGINA: Well, sure.
I mean, the predominant
religion doesn't
support that story in Turkey,
so that does make sense.
>>JUDKINS: And even in other
religions, it is recognized.
In the Muslim
religion, in Islam,
it's recognized, of
Noah and his ark.
In the Jewish faith,
in the Christian faith,
they're all recognized.
As a matter of fact,
it is pretty unique
that most of every culture
around the world, some 500
ubiquitous flood legends
around the world.
>>REGINA: Yes, absolutely.
>>JUDKINS: So everyone has their
own Noah and their own boat.
There's a common
thread that runs
through all those cultures.
I was in Peru back in January,
in Bolivia researching.
And it was very interesting.
Peru has a very rich culture.
Macchu Pichu is so
wonderful, by the way.
It's really a lost world.
It was lost to time
some 500 years.
And it is such a
wonderful place to visit.
>>REGINA: So they have their
own flood legends, as well.
>>JUDKINS: They really do.
The Native Americans here
in the United States.
So you have all these
different flood legends
with a common thread.
It's interesting that in the
Chinese language, embedded
in their language, the word
for "large ship"-- now,
the Chinese language is
kind of pictographical.
And the word for "large ship" is
eight plus persons plus a boat.
>>REGINA: Oh, interesting.
>>JUDKINS: And they still
use that for "large ship."
>>REGINA: Interesting.
Yes.
>>JUDKINS: Isn't
that interesting?
>>REGINA: Yes, it is.
>>JUDKINS: And their
name for Noah in Chinese
means "the man from whom
the weed curse is removed."
>>REGINA: The wheat?
>>JUDKINS: The weed.
>>REGINA: Weed curse.
>>JUDKINS: The man through
whom the weed curse is removed.
That goes back to
the story of Genesis.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>JUDKINS: This is
actually embedded
in the Chinese language.
So we see throughout
these cultures
that everyone has a flood story.
And we really wanted
to focus in on not only
those historical
accounts by Marco Polo
and by Josephus and people
who have gone through history
and have written records
and accounts about seeing
a structure on that
mountain, but more recent
accounts from 1906, 1904
from George Hagopian.
He said when he was about
10, him and his uncle
went up to the site twice.
And he gives an account
of seeing in the ark.
Again in 1943, Ed Davis,
who was stationed over
in Iran during World War
II, he was doing some work.
And they were actually
making a road from there
into-- from Turkey into Russia.
And one of the local
villages didn't have water.
They had to walk about
two miles to go get water.
And so Ed Davis, being an
engineer, took some dynamite.
Dynamite fixes everything.
And he went and
blasted this area
so water could flow
to the village.
Well, this family, Abas, who
was the leader of the village
said in return-- because you
saved our village, really,
and in return, as
a favor, we want
to be able to take you
to see the holy ark.
Now, this is what they
call it, the holy ark.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>JUDKINS: So Abas sent
his grandsons up to see
if the ark was visible.
Several days later
they came back
and they said it's visible.
And they said, if you can
get permission to leave,
we want to take you to see
the ark as a way to honor you.
And he got permission.
And it took him
three to four days
to climb up to
where that site was.
And they were about
100 feet over it.
And he said they looked
down and he saw it
in two levels, two structures.
He said it had broken in two.
And he gave this
account of what he saw.
And he said it was--
one was on a ledge.
One was over here.
He could see three levels.
He could see kind of
windows on the top.
And he said it was
a barge-like shape.
They said, well, how do you
know it was the ark, Ed?
He said, well there wasn't a
sign saying it was Noah's ark.
He said, what else could it be?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>JUDKINS: And they were going
to go the next morning to try
to reach down to the ark,
but it started raining.
They were in a little cave.
And they said, well,
maybe in the morning.
Well, it started snowing.
They woke up to snow.
And when they looked down, the
ark was completely covered.
They said, it's
too dangerous now,
because we can't really
see where we're going.
And they had to retreat
and go back down.
Ed Davis wrote this account
in his-- the front cover
of his Bible and never
really told anyone
until he was in his 80s.
It was such a personal
thing, he just
didn't really talk about it.
He had no agenda
to promote an ark.
And it was one of our colleagues
and friends, Dr. Don Shockey,
who finally got to interview Ed
Davis when he was in his 80s.
And Ed's account
in 1943 was very
similar to what
George Hagopian saw
when he was 10 back
in 1904 and 1906.
And so we see that these
historical accounts
are very similar.
>>REGINA: Going further
back, what about Marco Polo's
accounts?
>>JUDKINS: Well, you
know, it's interesting,
because prior to 1840,
the historical records
show that they were seeing
one structure on Ararat.
And they referred
to it as Noah's ark
or a ship on that mountain.
And so we know that.
After 1840, there was a huge
earthquake that hit that area.
Of course, Mount Ararat
is volcanic in nature.
And it's prone to
earthquakes as well.
And in 1840, they had
a huge earthquake.
There was a monastery
that was on the north
side of that mountain
at about 7,000 foot up.
And supposedly they had relics
from the ark in that monastery.
There was about 200
people living there.
It was an active
monastery prior to 1840.
When that earthquake hit,
it blew the Ahora Gorge out.
The Ahora Gorge is on that
northeast side of the mountain.
And it blew that side out.
That side is deeper
than the Grand Canyon.
So you can't just
go up the thing,
because there's cliffs that
are thousands of feet high.
If you're going from the top,
they're thousands of feet down.
Matter of fact, they found
people and artifacts there
from ages ago, people who
aren't wearing modern clothes.
They're 1,000 years old.
They're entombed in the ice.
So it's interesting that
when that Ahora Gorge blew,
it not only destroyed
that monastery
and killed about 200 people,
it suffered this huge ark--
>>REGINA: The ark was fractured?
>>JUDKINS: --that was all intact
prior to 1840, broke it in two.
And so that would
match the accounts
of Ed Davis and George Hagopian.
They said that they
saw it in two levels.
And then since then we
think it's broken even more.
>>REGINA: And so when you went
in with this crew of scientists
and filmmakers, you had the
advantage now-- to this point,
it's hearsay and it's
part of local lore based
on their own observations.
So now you're bringing
in some pretty hefty
scientific equipment with you.
Let's talk about
the work, once you
got there, the
window of opportunity
for working each day and
what kind of instruments
you were using.
>>JUDKINS: Well,
this expedition,
I was invited back in 2010 to
be part of the expedition team.
I couldn't go, unfortunately.
But this year I was-- in
2013, I was able to go.
This was supposed to be the
last major scientific push
to find Noah's ark.
And so that entails a
small window of time,
usually in August, when
the ice melts back--
is peak if it's going to.
The weather is better
during that time frame.
And so you get a small
window of time to go in there
and to try to do this.
And so that's the time
frame that we have to go in.
And you're talking using
satellite data imagery.
You're talking
ground-penetrating radar,
which you have to get that
ground-penetrating radar up
to the summit.
It just don't get
their own its own.
You can horseback
some of that stuff
and most of the equipment
up to 14,000 feet.
From there--
>>REGINA: Then you
have to carry it.
>>JUDKINS: --all has to be taken
off the horses and packed up.
>>REGINA: Wow.
>>JUDKINS: And I think we
broke the record for luggage
on the side of Ararat.
We had some 40-something
pieces of luggage
just from the camera crew and
from the scientific equipment
that we had.
>>REGINA: Did you have any
guides working with you?
>>JUDKINS: Oh, yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah?
We have local guys.
Some of them stayed
up to cook for us.
And listen, when
you're up that high
and you're living on a glacier,
a little glass of warm tea
and some bread, it goes a
long way because it's hot.
One morning we were eating some
bread in one of the big tents.
And we had generators
and things up there.
We have drills
and things that we
can drill down
through the ice with.
And my bread tasted
a little odd.
And I said, Dr. Bryant--
Dr. Bryant, John Bryant
is from Dallas.
And he is our
geophysicist, geologist
who brought the
ground-penetrating radar
with him.
And I said, does your
bread taste funny?
He goes, yeah.
It tastes like benzene fuel.
>>REGINA: Ah.
>>JUDKINS: And I said, it does.
And so we asked Adam, one
of the local Kurd boys.
We said, Adam,
our bread tastes--
our bread tastes funny.
It tastes like benzene fuel.
And he goes, oh,
they were carrying it
all in the same sack.
They threw the bread in with
the fuel and it spilled.
Of course, they don't bother
to tell you until later.
So you have those little things.
But it was a huge logistical
task to get the equipment up,
and then the communication
between the summit and the base
camp, to keep food
and fuel flowing
between the camps, whatever
needs that you have.
My coat didn't arrive until
the night before I summitted.
You're talking you have
to have Arctic gear.
I didn't have any of that stuff.
So I'm in the summer.
We're leaving in July.
Well, there's nothing
Arctic available.
So I had to order my
coat, an Arctic coat.
It has to come from the UK.
By the time I leave,
it's not at my house.
>>REGINA: Oh no.
>>JUDKINS: So I
leave for the trip.
I said, if it comes, send
it over to my colleague.
He's going to ship it over.
And the night-- I was at the
14,000-foot camp, high camp.
The night before I
summitted, that red coat
came up on horseback.
And it was brand
new in the wrapper.
>>REGINA: Wow.
You must have been happy.
>>JUDKINS: It was like
a Christmas present,
I opened up that coat--
>>REGINA: Thank God.
>>JUDKINS: Because
the one I had wasn't
going to work for the summit.
But you need all that equipment
so you can survive on the top
and do your work.
>>REGINA: Sure.
And now when we're
talking about you
had the ability to
take ice core samples.
You also had the
ability-- didn't
you have computers with you also
that were communicating data?
>>JUDKINS: Yes.
>>REGINA: This was a
sophisticated operation
as they go.
>>JUDKINS: It really is.
That GPR scans, you had to
pull that sled, by the way,
manually.
Everything that was
done on the top, I did.
I tried to do everything I
could, because everyone plays
a critical role up there.
And you have to double and
triple your roles sometimes
just to make it work.
I have a background in
the medical field as well.
And so I doubled
as the team medic.
And I was the
archaeologist on the dig.
One of our lead archaeologists,
Dr. Randall Price,
wasn't able to be on
the mountain that year.
And we fully expected
him to be there.
But it just so happened
he wasn't there.
So I was there for
the first time.
But you have all
these factors coming
at you and a lot of
obstacles to overcome,
a lot of challenges
on that mountain.
But once you're up there, you
have about three to four hours
of time to work.
>>REGINA: Each day?
>>JUDKINS: Each day.
And just walking from your
tent over to the dig site--
>>REGINA: Before
you're socked in.
>>JUDKINS: It's
incredibly taxing.
Matter of fact, Brent,
who's the producer/director
of the film-- our
dig site's here.
Your camp's over here.
And the Ahora Gorge is
right over this way.
You're on a slope.
You know, there's
nothing level up there.
And about 3 o'clock every day,
the clouds would come over.
You'd get socked in.
And it was very
difficult to work.
You only had four good
hours, really, a day to work.
And you would walk
in the distance
and then you would lose
people in the distance because
of the fog.
And you would get disoriented.
And Brent actually started
walking towards the Ahora
Gorge, thinking he was walking
to his tent, when he realized
this is getting
a little steeper.
>>REGINA: Oh, no.
How disastrous.
>>JUDKINS: He just
didn't really recognize--
he saw the rocks
were way over here
and they were supposed
to be over here.
And then he recognized, I'm
going towards Ahora Gorge
instead of towards my tent.
And listen, if you go
off the Ahora Gorge,
you may not come back if
you don't know where you're
going, because you're
talking hidden crevasses.
One of our cameraman, David
Lamb, was right in front of me.
And we was talking
about the crevasses.
I said, David, watch for the
crevasses because they're here.
Soon as I said that, he stepped
through a crevasse right
in front of me.
And he was able to stop himself.
But the crevasse kept going.
And he was trying to hand
me this expensive camera,
you know.
>>REGINA: Hang on
with his fingernails.
Oh, goodness.
>>JUDKINS: And I told David,
I said, please, give me
your hand, you know.
And we pulled him out of there.
But it's quite dangerous
on that mountain.
>>REGINA: OK.
So the $64,000
question is, OK, so you
have the
ground-penetrating radar
and you have this communication
going back and forth.
Give us an idea of some of what
was discovered once you were
able to actually get a few
hours work done each day.
>>JUDKINS: Well,
you know, what we
did was we started from
the previous season.
And the previous
season they had gone
down 35 feet in the
ice, a square hole down.
They thought they
had-- they thought
they had the ark pinpointed
to this location.
But when they went down,
they didn't hit anything
after 35 feet.
So when we were there,
they said, well,
we need to scoot
over a little bit.
And we need to start
finding out where we're at.
Dr. Bryant wasn't
there immediately.
So I began a grid, where
you take the ice core drill
and you have to drill
down through all that ice.
You're talking a lot of
ice just to find-- just
to hit something.
You know, you want
to sample something
before you dig another 35
foot hole through that ice.
You want to make sure that
you're on something before you
put that kind of--
invest that kind of labor
and manpower and
effort and energy
into digging that
kind of hole again.
So we decided we're going
to drill with ice core auger
drills.
A fantastic father and son
team, Bill and Will Hughes,
was the backbone
of that operation
and another archaeologist
colleague of mine, Bruce Hall.
And they were really
the three guys
who made that operation happen.
And without them, you
don't have a drill team.
That's taxing work.
It is hard work.
You have to have
someone on the auger
so it doesn't drop in the hole
when you put another auger on.
Then you've got a guy running
the machine to drill it down.
And you've got a guy
grabbing another auger.
And you've got to put those
on as you're drilling down.
And then you go over
to the next one.
So the drilling effort
persisted every day
through a grid pattern.
And that's what we want to know.
We want to know where
we're at, where we've been,
and where we're going so we can
find out where this thing is.
So it's really a needle
in a haystack search.
It really is.
>>REGINA: Did you finally--
did you find something?
>>JUDKINS: Well, what
we found was something
that we didn't expect to find.
Of course, we drill all
the way down to the gravel,
to the bedrock.
And then you come up
with gravel and pieces.
But what we found was we found
some interesting things that
really give us a question,
why would this be up here?
Why would something that
doesn't really belong up here
be up here?
And so those are
things that we're
searching for using
the satellite data
imagery, of course,
from NASA, that--
>>REGINA: It relays
back a 3D kind of image?
>>JUDKINS: The
satellite imagery--
>>REGINA: The
ground-penetrating radar?
>>JUDKINS: The
ground-penetrating--
the GPR scan did
reveal the 3D imagery,
with the newer technology
that Dr. Bryant brought.
The satellite imagery was
from real-time imagery
that was giving us access
from a bird's eye view.
And it's interesting that
just this past summer,
a private entity launched
another satellite
with a 12-inch
lens that is going
to be able to give
high resolution photos
of whatever they are
taking photos of.
And not so much just
the higher resolution,
but it can pick up
textures, different textures
of the ground.
And so we know from one
of the previous satellite
imageries that was done was that
there was an area of texture
that was different,
that was not rock.
It wasn't the ice.
It was different.
So we're hoping that this
newer satellite imagery will
be able to show what
this texture is.
Is it wood?
Is it rock?
Is it ice?
What is this?
And so that satellite
has now been launched.
But when you're looking at
this whole valley full of ice,
you know, Ed Davis in
1943, that whole valley is
under 60 to 90 feet of ice now.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And how deep were
you able to dig
in terms of the
ice core samples?
>>JUDKINS: Well, I mean, we
went all the way to bedrock.
We would go all the
way down until we
were firmly able to say, OK,
we've gone down to the bottom.
And you're talking a lot
of augers, a lot of-- you
know, you lose an auger
down in one of those holes,
especially your
core drilling bits,
and you're out of business.
You're out of operation.
And we lost one.
We only lost one
in the whole time.
But you know, it's really
interesting that when
you're looking at the
satellite imagery,
and you're looking at the GPR,
and Dr. Bryant plugs all that
into the computer, and
it has to be interpreted.
It gets sent back.
It gets sent back to the States.
And then it gets sent back to
us, where we can look at that.
And there's anomalies
under the ice.
And you have to identify
what those anomalies are.
And you have to
investigate every anomaly.
So it's a lot of work.
>>REGINA: So OK,
now are you going--
will they go back again, or
was this the last expedition?
>>JUDKINS: Well,
it's interesting
that supposedly
this was going to be
the last expedition for
the search for Noah's ark.
>>REGINA: But did you
find enough anomalies that
it's worth--
>>JUDKINS: There's
still alternate science
that we're looking at.
It's interesting
that if the ark is
broken in multiple
pieces, which we think
it is-- we know after
the 1840 earthquake
it broke in two pieces.
We think it's now
in probably four.
But if it's in pieces and it's
down that Ahora Gorge side,
it's a very difficult
thing to find.
So one of our alternative
spots that we would like to hit
is the Ahora Gorge.
But getting in there
is so treacherous.
>>REGINA: That
sounds so dangerous.
>>JUDKINS: It really is.
It really is.
>>REGINA: So, I
mean, how is that
even possible from
what you've described?
>>JUDKINS: Well, you would have
to either-- you would probably
have to go from the
bottom to the top.
And look, when you do that,
those boulders coming down
do not stop.
And I haven't ever been on
that side from the bottom.
But from people that
have been through there,
it's very, very dangerous.
Going from the top, those cliffs
are thousands of feet deep.
That area's deeper
than the Grand Canyon.
So I don't know how
you would do it.
But, you know, until we get
some more areas of opportunity
or windows of opportunity
where we can go back and search
for this alternate
location-- I think we should,
it's just can we get
in there and confirm.
You know, that's
part of the reason
I went was to confirm,
verify, if there's
a structure on Greater Ararat.
And that's what we're
seeking to answer.
>>REGINA: So when
we watch the film,
will we be able to see
some of the imagery
that you're talking about?
>>JUDKINS: Yeah, I think so.
The film is-- it's a full-length
theatrical documentary film.
And it's going to be released
probably in the late fall
or in the winter of 2014.
And so it's probably going
to be in a theater near you
somewhere.
It is really going to
be an excellent film.
These guys filmed
in high definition
and never before places where
you just can't get into hardly.
But these guys went in
and filmed these areas
and got some really excellent
footage, superb filming,
and really professional
throughout the whole thing.
And not only did they
film on the mountain,
though, this film has taken them
to at least a dozen countries
filming other people,
experts in the field,
and getting expert testimony
and looking at, really,
a rounded picture.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Maybe one of the most
complete portraits.
>>JUDKINS: I think so.
It's really going to be a
comprehensive story from not
only the historical searches,
but what's being done now.
The film's really about
the intrepid explorers,
you know, searching for answers.
It's a quest for truth.
But not just a quest
for truth, it's
really about a testament
to the human spirit,
about why men go on
these perilous journeys
and explore for
something that's unknown.
Why would people go do that?
Why would I go do that?
And for me, when I
had to ask myself
the question, why would
I-- why am I doing this,
it's because I realized that
this is greater than me.
It's greater than one person.
This find would represent
one of the greatest
archaeological finds in history.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>JUDKINS: And if it's
that-- if that's confirmed,
and if we can,
say, independently
verify and document a
structure such as Noah's ark
on Greater Ararat,
it would change
everything we know in history.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>JUDKINS: It would
really change everything.
>>REGINA: So is that in itself
the most profound aspect
of this expedition for you?
>>JUDKINS: I think so.
Yeah, it really is, because
it's-- you're part of something
that's greater than yourself.
You're part of history.
And look, a lot of people
talk about going to do things.
A lot of people talk about,
well, they haven't found this,
they haven't found this.
There's a lot of talk out there.
And I love discussions,
and I really do.
But it's another thing to go
there and search for yourself.
It's another thing to
say, you know what?
I've actually been
on Mount Ararat,
and this is my experience
on the mountain.
And so it's a whole
lot different.
Life is really
about perspectives.
And when you go
first-hand and you explore
these things for yourself
and the perspective you
get from that experience, it
really changes everything.
>>REGINA: I bet it does.
Is your son proud of you?
>>JUDKINS: He is.
>>REGINA: You
didn't let him down.
>>JUDKINS: Yeah.
Dad made it to the top,
and Dad came back now.
But you know, I asked him.
I said, you know, my
grandparents were rockhounds.
And I grew up hunting for rocks.
I love rocks.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Beautiful crystal here.
>>JUDKINS: And that's how I
got started, just inquisitive
and enjoyed doing that.
And I said, you want
Daddy to bring you
back a rock from Mount Ararat?
And of course, he said yes.
But he said Daddy, I
just want you come home.
And so you know,
when you go out there
and you're able to do
something like that,
and you're able to come down
in one piece-- it was hard.
Coming down was even
harder than going up.
It was brutal coming
down, because the weight
and the impact on your
knees and your feet.
And listen, what took me five
days to summit Mount Ararat,
it took me 12 hours to
descend, all in one day,
because I wanted
off that mountain.
I was ready to get off.
>>REGINA: Wow.
>>JUDKINS: But I came from
the summit down to the bottom
all in one day.
And I was sure glad to
get off that mountain.
>>REGINA: I bet you were.
And so we can find that
at findingnoah.com, right?
>>JUDKINS: That's
right. findingnoah.com,
that's the film website.
>>REGINA: That's
the film website.
And your personal
website, aaronjudkins.com.
And then they can
find out about some
of the other intrepid
adventures you've
been up to throughout
your career.
>>JUDKINS: Oh, I've
been all over the world.
I really love it.
It's really quite an adventure.
Every time you go out,
it's something new.
When you find an artifact that's
been laying in the dirt-- to me
digging in the dirt's fun.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
There you go.
>>JUDKINS: But those
artifacts, those objects, those
tell a story.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>JUDKINS: And Noah's
ark on Mount Ararat
definitely tells a story.
>>REGINA: Thank
you so much, Aaron.
>>JUDKINS: Thank
you for having me.
>>REGINA: Again, the
title of the film
is "Finding Noah," which is out
in theaters around the country.
As Aaron said,
this artifact will
validate the long-held
tale that humanity
has been subjected to
catastrophic floods
in our deep history, which
in itself has changed
our human direction and history.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.